Simple Algebraic Data Types
===========================

Products and coproducts are used to combine data types and create data structures that are known as *Algebraic Data Types (ADT's)*.

Products and coproducts combine data types following a set of well defined rules and the resulting structures are so composable that many of their properties like equality, ordering or string translation can be automatically derived. For instance, if one already knows how to compare basic data types, then implementing equality for a product or coproduct of those types is just a matter of aggregating the results of comparing each data following the rules of the product or coproduct they belong to.

These structures are called *Algebraic Data Types* because when products and coproducts combine data types they create monoids, which end up behaving like multiplication and addition, opening the door to further composition through algebraic expressions.


Isomorphism vs Equality
-----------------------
Category theory focuses on the shape of objects rather than their specifics, for that reason strict equality is replaced by isomorphism in algebraic expressions used to combine ADT's, and we say that equality of ADT's is defined *up to isomorphism*.


Product Types
-------------
The canonical implementation of a product of two types is a pair `(a, b)`, which in algebraic notation might be expressed as `a * b`.

Another way used in Haskell to represent products is creating new types with the traditional syntax:
```haskell
data Pair a b = Pair a b
```

Or, even better, using the record syntax:
```haskell
data Pair a b = Pair { first :: a
                     , second:: b }
```

The terminal object, called *Unit*, plays the role of the neutral element and is represented in Haskell as an empty tuple `()`.

Up to isomorphism, products exhibit the same properties of multiplication:
- Commutative property
  ```haskell
  -- a * b = b * a
  (a, b) = (b, a)
  ```
- Associative property
  ```haskell
  -- (a * b) * c = a * (b * c) = a * b * c
  ((a, b), c) = (a, (b, c)) = (a, b, c)
  ```
- Identity property
  ```haskell
  -- a * 1 = a
  (a, ()) = a
  ```


Sum Types
---------
Sum types are coproducts. In Haskell they are declared by combining multiple constructors in the same type using a vertical bar, the canonical implementation is the `Either` type:
```haskell
data Either a b = Left a | Right b
```

The initial object, called *Void*, plays the role of the neutral element.

Up to isomorphism, coproducts exhibit the same properties of addition:
- Commutative property
  ```haskell
  -- a + b = b + a
  Either a b = Either b a
  ```
- Associative property
  ```haskell
  -- (a + b) + c = a + (b + c)
  Either (Either a b) c = Either a (Either b, c)
  ```
- Identity property
  ```haskell
  -- a + 0 = a
  Either a Void = a
  ```


Algebra of Types
----------------
As in regular algebra product and sum types also exhibit the distributive property:
```haskell
-- a * (b + c) = a * b + a * c
(a, Either b c) = Either (a, b) (a, c)
```

And multiplication by zero also exists:
```haskell
-- a * 0 = 0
(a, Void) = Void
```

Even recursive equations can be defined:
```haskell
-- l(a) = 1 + a * l(a)
data List a = Nil | Cons a (List a)
```

This equivalence between types and numbers is possible because both are [semirings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiring).

| Numbers   | Types
| -------   | -----
| 0         | Void
| 1         | ()
| a + b     | data Either a b = Left a \| Right b
| a * b     | (a, b) or Pair a b = Pair a b
| 2 = 1 + 1 | data Bool = True \| False
| 1 + a     | data Maybe = Nothing \| Just a


Logical `and` and `or` also form a semiring, and they can also be mapped into type theory:

| Logic    | Types
| -----    | -----
| false    | Void
| true     | ()
| a \|\| b | data Either a b = Left a \| Right b
| a && b   | (a, b)

This analogy goes deeper, and is the basis of the Curry-Howard isomor-phism between logic and type theory.


Challenges
----------
#### 1. Show the isomorphism between `Maybe a` and `Either () a`.
See [Adts.hs](../haskell/Adts.hs)

#### 2. Here’s a sum type defined in Haskell:
```haskell
data Shape = Circle Float
           | Rect Float Float
```

When we want to define a function like `area` that acts on a `Shape`, we do it by pattern matching on the two constructors:
```haskell
area :: Shape -> Float
area (Circle r) = pi * r * r
area (Rect d h) = d * h
```

Implement Shape in C++ or Java as an interface and create two classes: `Circle` and `Rect`. Implement `area` as a virtual function.

See [Shape.java](../java/src/test/java/org/krloxz/training/cattheory/Shape.java)

#### 3. Continuing with the previous example: We can easily add a new function `circ` that calculates the circumference of a `Shape`. We can do it without touching the definition of `Shape`:
```haskell
circ :: Shape -> Float
circ ( Circle r) = 2.0 * pi * r
circ ( Rect d h) = 2.0 * (d + h)
```

Add `circ` to your C++ or Java implementation. What parts of the original code did you have to touch?

**Answer:** All the types.

#### 4. Continuing further: Add a new shape, `Square`, to `Shape` and make all the necessary updates. What code did you have to touch in Haskell vs. C++ or Java? (Even if you’re not a Haskell programmer, the modifications should be pretty obvious.)
In Java I just added a new class and a new factory method to the `Shape` interface. In Haskell I had to update the definition of the data type and all the functions.

#### 5. Show that `a + a = 2 * a` holds for types (up to isomorphism). Remember that `2` corresponds to `Bool`, according to our translation table.
```haskell
a + a = 2 * a
-- 2 = Bool
Either a a = (Bool, a)
-- Bool = Either () ()
Either a a = ((Either () ()), a)
-- Applying distributive property
Either a a = Either (a, ()) (a, ())
-- (a, ()) = a
Either a a = Either a a
```
